[Music]
every cell in your body is separated
from those around it by its outermost
layer its membrane a cell membrane must
be both sturdy and flexible imagine a
membrane made of metal great at keeping
the cell's guts inside but horrible at
letting materials flow in and out but a
membrane made of fishnet stocking would
go too far in the opposite direction
leaky but easily torn so the ideal
membrane falls somewhere in the middle
over the past few centuries we've
learned a lot about the way membranes
work the tale starts in the late 1800s
when according to legend a German woman
named Agnes pakal's was doing dishes her
observation that not all detergents
dissolve grease in the same way piqued
her curiosity so she made careful
measurements of the size of soapy films
that formed on the surface of a metal
tray filled with water later in the
1920s GE scientists Irving Langmuir and
Kathleen Blodgett re-examined the
problem with a more elaborate
contraption and found that those tiny
slicks were in fact a single layer of
oil molecules each oil molecule has one
side that loves water and floats on the
surface and one side that load this
water and protrudes into the air so what
does it have to do with cell membranes
well at the turn of the 20th century
chemists Charles Overton and Hans Meyer
demonstrated that the cell membrane is
composed of substances that like oil
have a water-loving part and a water
loathing part we now call these
substances lipids in 1925 to scientists
Evert Gorder and Francois Grendel pushed
our understanding further they designed
an experiment meant to test whether cell
membranes are made of only one layer of
lipids a mono layer or two layers
stacked on top of one another called a
bilayer Gorder and Grendel drew blood
from a dog a sheep a rabbit a goat a
guinea pig and human volunteers from
each of these samples they extracted all
the lipids from all the red blood cells
and placed a few drops of this extract
on a tray of water
true to form the lipids like oil spread
out into a monolayer whose size 1/4 and
Grendel could measure if they compared
the surface area of that mono layer to
the surface area of the intact red blood
cells they'd be able to tell whether the
red blood cell membrane is one or two
layers thick to understand the design of
their experiment imagine looking down at
a sandwich if you measure the surface
area of what you see you'll get the
dimensions of a single slice of bread
even though there are two slices one
stacked perfectly atop the other but if
you open the sandwich and place the two
slices side-by-side you get twice the
surface area the quarter and Grendel
experiment is basically the same idea
the open sandwich is the mono layer
formed by the extracted cellular lipids
spreading out into a sheet the closed
sandwich is the intact red blood cell
membrane lo and behold they observed a
two-to-one ratio proving beyond a shadow
of a doubt that a cell membrane is a
bilayer which when unstacked yields a
mono layer twice its size so almost 30
years before the double helix structure
of DNA was elucidated a single
experiment involving fancy versions of
household materials enabled deep insight
into the basic architecture of the cell
Oh